Cypress Docs (#3487)
kubeshop/tracetest: docs/docs/tools-and-integrations/cypress.mdx

---
id: cypress

> title: Running Tracetest with Cypress using the Pokeshop Demo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Trace-Based End to End Testing with Cypress and Tracetest
```

description: Tracetest can be integrated and used with Cypress. This guide shows running Tracetest tests from Cypress.
keywords:
  - tracetest
  - trace-based testing
  - observability
  - distributed tracing
  - testing
  - cypress
image: https://res.cloudinary.com/djwdcmwdz/image/upload/v1698686403/docs/Blog_Thumbnail_14_rsvkmo.jpg
---

[Tracetest](https://tracetest.io/) is a testing tool based on [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) that permits you to test your distributed application. It allows you to use the trace data generated by your OpenTelemetry tools to check and assert if your application has the desired behavior defined by your test definitions.

[Cypress](https://www.cypress.io/) is a JavaScript end-to-end testing framework. It is used for testing web applications by simulating user interactions within the browser. Cypress provides a fast, reliable, and easy-to-use testing environment for developers.

## Why is this important?

> Cypress is currently one of the top e2e testing frameworks, it is a great tool in its own right that allows you to replicate most of the production challenges you might encounter by allowinig developers test the system from the user perspective. But, as with all of the tools that only test the UI portion application, you can only run validations against what the user would see while going through the flows.

Reviewer 2: allowinig should be allowing

> Cypress is currently one of the top e2e testing frameworks, it is a great tool in its own right that allows you to replicate most of the production challenges you might encounter by allowinig developers test the system from the user perspective. But, as with all of the tools that only test the UI portion application, you can only run validations against what the user would see while going through the flows.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Cypress is currently one of the top e2e testing frameworks, it is a great tool in its own right that allows you to replicate most of the production challenges you might encounter by allowing developers to test the system from the user perspective. But, as with all of the tools that only test the UI portion application, you can only run validations against what the user would see while going through the flows.
```

> Cypress is currently one of the top e2e testing frameworks, it is a great tool in its own right that allows you to replicate most of the production challenges you might encounter by allowing developers to test the system from the user perspective. But, as with all of the tools that only test the UI portion application, you can only run validations against what the user would see while going through the flows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cypress is currently one of the top end to end testing frameworks, it is a great tool in its own right that allows you to replicate most of the production challenges you might encounter by allowing developers to test the system from the user perspective. But, as with all of the tools that only test the UI portion application, you can only run validations against what the user would see while going through the flows.
```

## How It Works

The following is a high-level sequence diagram of how Cypress and Tracetest interact with the different pieces of the system.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
  Cypress->>+Scripts: Execute tests
  Scripts->>+@tracetest/cypress: Configures library
  @tracetest/cypress-->>-Scripts: Ok
  Scripts->>+Scripts: Visits website
  Scripts->>+@tracetest/cypress: captures and injects traceparent meta tag
  @tracetest/cypress-->-Scripts: Ok
  Scripts->>+Scripts: Executes test
  Scripts->>+@tracetest/cypress: Runs test
  @tracetest/cypress-->-Scripts: Ok
  Scripts->>@tracetest/cypress: Waits for results and shows the summary
```

> ## The `@tracetest/cypress` npm package

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## The `@tracetest/cypress` npm Package
```

The `@tracetest/cypress` npm package is a Cypress plugin that allows you to run Trace-based testing using Tracetest and Cypress. It is a wrapper around the Tracetest API that allows you to configure, orchestrate and run tests from Cypress.

## Requirements

**Tracetest Account**:

- Sign up to [`app.tracetest.io`](https://app.tracetest.io) or follow the [get started](/getting-started/installation) docs.
- Create an [environment](/concepts/environments).
- Create an [environment token](/concepts/environment-tokens).
- Have access to the environment's [agent API key](/configuration/agent).

> **Pokeshop Demo:** Clone the official Tracetest Pokeshop Demo App to your local machine.

Reviewer 2: Can we provide a link to this repo?

**Docker**: Have [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) and [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/) installed on your machine.

## Project Structure

The project is built with Docker Compose.

### Pokeshop Demo App

The [Pokeshop Demo App](/live-examples/pokeshop/overview) is a complete example of a distributed application using different backend and front-end services, implementation code is written in Typescript.

The `docker-compose.yml` file in the root directory is for the Pokeshop Demo app and the OpenTelemetry setup.

> And the `docker-compose.e2e.yml` includes the and the [Tracetest Agent](/concepts/agent).

Reviewer 3: ...includes the ??? and the... Missing text after the first 'the'.

Finally, the Cypress E2E tests can be found in `cypress/e2e/1-getting-started`.

> ## The Cypress setup

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## The Cypress Setup
```

The Cypress setup is pretty straightforward, it was generated by installing the Cypress dependency and configuring it from the UI after running `cypress open`. The configuration script looks like this:

```typescript
import { defineConfig } from "cypress";
import { config } from "dotenv"; // loads the environment variables

config();

module.exports = defineConfig({
  chromeWebSecurity: false,
  e2e: {
    baseUrl: process.env.POKESHOP_DEMO_URL || "http://localhost:3000",
    env: {
      TRACETEST_API_TOKEN: process.env.TRACETEST_API_TOKEN, // used to authenticate with Tracetest
    },
    setupNodeEvents() {
      // implement node event listeners here
    },
  },
});
```

> ### The `home.cy` test script

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### The `home.cy` Test Script
```

The `home.cy` test script contains three different tests based on the Pokeshop Demo UI fetures, which are:

1. Creates a Pokemon
2. Imports a Pokemon (using an async process)
3. Deletes a Pokemon

> ### Tracetest library setup

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Tracetest Library Setup
```

> If you go to the `package.json` file you will find the inclusion of a Tracetest package for cypress `@tracetest/cypress`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you go to the `package.json` file you will find the inclusion of a Tracetest package for Cypress `@tracetest/cypress`.
```

The first thing the test script does is import the package, grab the Tracetest API token from the environment variables and create the Tracetest instance.

```typescript
import Tracetest from "@tracetest/cypress";
const TRACETEST_API_TOKEN = Cypress.env("TRACETEST_API_TOKEN") || "";
const tracetest = Tracetest();
```

Afterward, during the `before` hook, the test script **configures** the Tracetest instance with the API token.

```typescript
before((done) => {
  tracetest.configure(TRACETEST_API_TOKEN).then(() => done());
});
```

Then, during the `beforeEach` hook, the script **captures** the document to inject the `traceparent` to the meta tag.

```typescript
beforeEach(() => {
  cy.visit("/", {
    onBeforeLoad: (win) => tracetest.capture(win.document),
  });
});
```

Lastly, during the `afterEach` hook, the script **runs** the test with an optional definition string.

```typescript
afterEach((done) => {
  const definition = Cypress.env("definition") || "";
  tracetest.runTest(definition).then(() => done());
});
```

> **OPTIONAL**: If you want to wait for the test to finish and break the cypress execution based on a failed Tracetest test, you can add the `after` hook and call the `summary` method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**OPTIONAL**: If you want to wait for the test to finish and break the Cypress execution based on a failed Tracetest test, you can add the `after` hook and call the `summary` method.
```

    id: aW1wb3J0cyBhIHBva2Vtb24=
    name: imports a pokemon
    trigger:
      type: cypress
    specs:
    - selector: span[tracetest.span.type="http"] span[tracetest.span.type="http"]
      name: "All HTTP Spans: Status  code is 200"
      assertions:
      - attr:http.status_code   =   200
    - selector: span[tracetest.span.type="database"]
      name: "All Database Spans: Processing time is less than 100ms"
      assertions:
      - attr:tracetest.span.duration < 100ms
    outputs:
    - name: MY_OUTPUT
      selector: span[tracetest.span.type="general" name="Tracetest trigger"]
      value: attr:name
    `;

  it("imports a pokemon", { env: { definition } }, () => {
    cy.get('[data-cy="import-pokemon-button"]').click();
    cy.get('[data-cy="import-pokemon-form"]').should("be.visible");

    cy.get('[id="id"]')
      .last()
      .type(Math.floor(Math.random() * 101).toString());
    cy.get("button").contains("OK").click({ force: true });
  });

  it("deletes a pokemon (2)", () => {
    cy.get('[data-cy="pokemon-list"]').should("be.visible");
    cy.get('[data-cy="pokemon-card"]').first().click().get('[data-cy="delete-pokemon-button"]').first().click();
  });
});
```

> ### Setting the environment variables

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Setting the Environment Variables
```

Copy the `.env.example` file to `.env` and add the Tracetest API token and agent tokens to the `TRACETEST_API_TOKEN` and `TRACETEST_AGENT_API_KEY` variables.

### Starting the Pokeshop Demo App

To start the Pokeshop Demo App, run the following command from the root directory:

```bash
docker compose up -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose.e2e.yml
```

> ### Running the tests

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Running the Tests
```

  (Run Finished)

       Spec                                              Tests  Passing  Failing  Pending  Skipped
  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │ ✔  home.cy.ts                               00:41        3        3        -        -        - │
  └────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
    ✔  All specs passed!                        00:41        3        3        -        -        -

```

#### Using the Cypress UI

To run the tests using the Cypress UI, run the following command from the root directory:

```bash
npm run cy:open
```

Then, navigate your way to the `e2e` section and select the `home.cy` test script.

![Cypress UI](./img/cypress-scripts.png)

You should see the three tests running and passing.
And by looking at the browser console log you can find the statuses and results of the tests.

![Cypress Results](./img/cypress-open-results.png)

Then, you can follow any of the result links in the console log to the Tracetest App and see the results of the tests.

> The Tracetest library uses the same as the spec name for the trace-based tests, that way you can identify them more easily, it also fills some of the metadata directly from the cypress execution. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Tracetest library uses the spec name for the trace-based tests. That way you can identify them more easily and it also fills in some of the metadata directly from the Cypress execution. 
```

![Tracetest App](./img/cypress-tracetest-tests.png)

Lastly, you can now create assertions based on the trace data that was captured from the browser to the backend services.

> Starting with the click events and the fetch request from the client side, to the HTTP requests and database queries from the backend services, including async processes like the one showcased during the import pokemon test.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From the click events and the fetch request from the client side to the HTTP requests and database queries from the backend services, async processes like the one showcased during the import Pokemon test are included.
```
